Welcome back.
In this section we're focusing on object oriented programming or at least javascript flavor of Opie.
Object oriented programming so we'll cover things like constructor functions and classes super keyword
inheritance.
But we're gonna start with a quick video on a quirky but important aspect of javascript object prototypes.
So you may have come across this at some point we've briefly touched on it throughout the course a couple
of times.
We're not going to take a deeper dive into what the heck a prototype is.
What does it mean.
What is this thing.
When I look at an array What is this proto underscore underscore proto property.
So that's we're going to talk about first and then we'll go more into creating constructor functions
and classes and all of that stuff.
All right.
So according to MDA and prototypes are the mechanism by which JavaScript objects inherent features inherit
features from one another.
Objects can have a prototype object which acts as a template object.
So what this means is that certain objects will take an array as an example an array has a whole bunch
of different methods.
If we look at something like array on MDA on the left side we've seen this a couple of times methods
under methods.
There are so many methods that start with a red dot prototype dot can cat entries every fill Key's push
reduce all these methods that we use all the time like one two three dot push for that push method is
not defined as a method on this array right here by save it to a variable const R R equals one two three.
If we look at that array I don't see any methods right here.
I mean I could define my own method a red dot saying equals a function and we can console that log.
Hi I have a la la la.
Okay so there is a function or method technically that I added to the array itself the individual array.
It has a method called Sing remember.
Arrays are objects in javascript so when we added that method to array we see it show up here.
But when I call a red dot.
Push push 5.
I don't see that method listed here.
I don't see any of the methods we use.
They're all inside of this property called underscore underscore Prado underscore underscore just Proto.
Some people also call this Dunder double underscore Dunder.
I just say Proto.
It's a property that references the array prototype so a prototype is the template object for in this
case arrays it contains a bunch of methods typically.
So all of these methods that every array will have access to.
But rather than defining them individually in every single array a separate copy right I could make
another array here.
Concerta Ray to equals four five six.
We look at a ray too.
It doesn't have its own copy of push and pop all that it has just as the original array that we created.
They both share a property called proto which is a reference to this blueprint object.
The prototype.
This prototype contains all of the methods and through the magic of javascript I can simply access array
dots and then what's another one we haven't used yet.
How about includes.
Does that array include two we get true.
This includes method is not defined on every single array that we make it is defined on this prototype
object.
Now the reason I'm bringing this up is that it matters.
It's something we will cover and come back to as we talk about defining classes and constructor functions.
So rather than having a separate method on every single array called push there is one prototype and
each array has a reference to that prototype with this special property double underscore proto and
we actually can see this in other types of objects in javascript.
What if I take a look at the document dump body and I save that to a variable concept.
We'll just call this body if we look at body.
I'm gonna have to console that desire.
Body will open it up.
It has certain properties that are specific to this body things like the base you are I the background
but then it also has a proto down at the bottom.
It's prototype is an HD female body element and there are different methods and properties that correspond
to that prototype template.
This age came out body template so that's the basic idea of a prototype or prototypes in JavaScript.
We have this one object that is the the prototype for other types of objects.
So there is no Ray prototype.
If I look at a ray dot prototype capital a ray so not an individual instance of an array but capital
a array.
Here is everything on that array prototype and I could actually define my own type of an object my own
brand new object and set its prototypes to the array prototype and I would have access to those array
methods in my whatever object my version of the array.
But we're not there yet.
All we need to know at this point is that prototypes are like a template object that's that's actually
what they are they are objects they contain typically a bunch of methods and then we can create multiple
objects that share the same prototype so that they all have access to the same methods without having
to have their own copy.
Now as a fun little demo here we can actually mess with or add our own properties and methods to the
array prototype or object prototype or whatever prototypes we want.
There is a string dot prototype as well.
Strings are kind of confusing.
Yes we've talked about have strings and numbers and billions are technically primitive types.
However in JavaScript they all get these intermediate object wrappers and that's where all those string
methods come from the string prototype.
So I could actually add on something to the string prototype right now.
If I just take a look we see a bunch of string methods like can cat and a property like length.
What else do we have substring starts with.
Search replace.
I could add my own method called Grumps go back to good old Grumps set it to an arrow function and we'll
just console that log but we alert go away just like that okay.
So it doesn't seem like much happened.
We look at string dot prototype this prototype object this template for other strings now has a property
called crumpets.
So why don't I make a new String.
I'll call this concept a cat equals blue I guess.
One of my cats.
Now what if I try and call cat dot Grumps.
Hey.
This page says go away.
So now every time you make a string at least until I refresh my page I now have access to a new string
method called rumpus.
I could also add on a property I could do a string dot prototype Dot.
How about we do yell and do something slightly more complicated I think if we move over to my code here.
Let's access string dot prototype which remember is the prototype object for every string.
It is the place where string methods are stored.
I can now add on something let's go with yellow which will be a function and let's just console but
log this instead of here for a moment.
So we're getting ahead of ourselves but I want to just show something kind of fun.
If I run my code I make some string like hello and I call dot yell this referred to this string Hello.
So what I could do is console that log this dot to uppercase so this refers to whatever string we're
calling the method on which is actually something we've seen before where we had an object and we would
refer to this dot X instead of that object.
This will refer to whatever's on the left hand side of that dot at least in this case.
So let's try.
Hello Dot yellow again.
All right.
We've just called an existing method dot to uppercase which is already there.
So why don't we return a template literal string where we have this dot to uppercase plus a bunch of
bunch of exclamation points and then how about some other stuff like O M G more exclamation points.
That's screaming apparently.
OK.
Refresh my page and make some string like I love you Dot.
Yo and this is what we get.
We've made our own method that we can use on every single string.
It's important to realize that this is not really a good idea.
This is not a pattern that I would recommend you follow all the time.
It's just a demonstration of how prototypes work.
So we can add something to the array prototype Ray dot prototype which is a specific object a template
that stores methods and properties for every single array and we can override something like dot pop
and we'll make that a function but it will just always return.
Sorry.
I want that element.
I will never pop it off.
Okay.
So we are now replacing the existing pop that every array looks up to on its array prototype.
So if I make an array like three four five and I call pop huh it doesn't work.
We get our version.
So kind of fun stuff not highly recommended but it is going to be informative.
It would be helpful to understand prototypes.
It's actually a relatively simple idea.
It's very intimidating.
I think when you're starting out that the idea boils down to having a single object that contains common
properties and methods that other copies other objects of arrays or other strings look up to to find
their common properties.
It's a place to store things the template blueprint.
There's so many ways of putting it but the term in Javascript is prototype.
The one confusing thing that I would like to address is I make an array here concept.
I don't know numbers again and notes so boring numbs seven eight nine if I look at numbers.
What does this underscore proton versus prototype.
So they both are very similar and they both sound like prototype or proton this here a ray dot prototype
is the actual object where we add the methods to or the properties.
This is the template object the prototype.
This is a reference so underscore Proton is a property name on this array or on this string.
I could look.
I don't have a string now but I could make a string const dog equals Timothy and if I look at dog dot
underscore proto it's a reference to the string prototype to this object so it's a reference vs..
This here is the actual prototype object that I can add on to but inside individual strings or arrays
or other objects the property name that is used to reference that actual template the prototype object
is double underscore protip it's pretty rare that you would ever need to touch this yourself or do anything
with underscore proto.
If anything you will be accessing the actual prototype itself and manipulating it.
So that is a brief primer on prototypes.
Next we're going to talk about some basics of constructor functions in JavaScript.